content: Add autonomous navigation ROS2 tutorial (#81)
fictionlab/docs: docs/leo-rover/advanced-guides/autonomous-navigation.mdx

---
title: Autonomous Navigation
sidebar_label: Autonomous Navigation
sidebar_position: 1
description: >-
  Learn how to set up autonomous navigation for your Leo Rover. This guide
  covers the necessary steps and configurations to enable autonomous movement.
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import ThemedImageZoom from '@site/src/components/ThemedImageZoom';

In this tutorial, you will learn how to set up autonomous navigation for your

> Leo Rover. This guide covers the necessary steps and configurations to enable

Reviewer: Should probably mention clearly that this is only an example of indoor navigation with 2D Lidar and optional depth camera

To complete this tutorial, you will need a 2D LiDAR sensor compatible with Leo
Rover. You can find the list of compatible sensors here:

<LinkButton
  to="/integrations/lidars"
  title="Leo Rover LiDAR Integrations"
  description="List of LiDAR sensors compatible with Leo Rover."
/>

And optionally, you can use a compatible stereo camera for better navigation
capabilities. The examples of stereo cameras compatible with Leo Rover are:

<LinkButton
  to="/integrations/cameras"
  title="Oak-D Stereo Camera"
  description="Learn how to connect an Oak-D stereo camera to your Leo Rover for enhanced
  depth perception and obstacle avoidance."
/>

<LinkButton
  to="/integrations/cameras/intel-realsense"
  title="Intel RealSense D435i"
  description="Learn how to connect an Intel RealSense camera to your Leo Rover for
  depth perception and obstacle avoidance."
/>

Make sure you are operating on the latest LeoOS image for the Raspberry Pi and
you are up-to-date with the packages and have the newest firmware flashed.

You will also need to have ROS installed on your computer and some previous
experience with ROS is recommended.

> ## Verifying sensor data

Reviewer: Add some cli commands for checking if the sensors and tfs are working

Before you start configuring the navigation, it's a good idea to verify that
your sensors are working correctly and publishing data. LiDAR sensors should be

> publishing scan data on the ROS topic (autonomous package uses `/scan` as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishing scan data on the ROS topic (`leo_nav` package uses `/scan` as
```

(`/oak/stereo/image_raw` by default) or pointcloud data (`/oak/points` by
default). If there is no data being published, you should check the sensor
connections and integration. If the data is being published on a different
topic, you will need to remap the topics later.

Remember to also verify if the `tf` transformations exist for sensors. For the
system to work correctly, the `base_footprint` needs to have a transformation to
the sensor data frames.

## Preparing the environment

There are a few things you will need to prepare on Leo Rover and on your
computer, in order to use the software for autonomous navigation.

### On Leo Rover

You will need to build the `leo_nav` package first. To do this, start by
accessing a remote terminal session on Leo Rover by logging in via SSH:

<LinkButton
  to="/leo-rover/guides/ssh"
  title="Connect via SSH"
  description="Learn how to establish an SSH connection with your Leo Rover and access its
  terminal using Putty or OpenSSH."
/>

Create a ROS workspace if you haven't done so already:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/ros_ws/src
cd ~/ros_ws/src
```

Clone the `leo_nav` package from the Leo Rover GitHub repository:

```bash

> git clone -b ros2 https://github.com/LeoRover/leo_navigation_tutorial.git

Reviewer: git clone and rosdep require internet connection. Make sure to mention the guide for connecting to the internet

```

Use `rosdep` to install the dependencies:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Make sure to do `sudo apt update` before rosdep install

Author: Added

cd ~/ros_ws
rosdep update
rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
```

Build the workspace:

```bash
colcon build --symlink-install
```

Source the workspace:

```bash
source ~/ros_ws/install/setup.bash
```

:::info

You will have to source the workspace on every terminal session you want to use
the package on. If you want to do it automatically upon logging into a session,

> add the above line to the `~/.bashrc` file.

Reviewer: Instead of adding it to .bashrc, we should recommend replacing `source /opt/ros/jazzy/setup.bash` in `/etc/ros/setup.bash`

Author: Done

  scans being used for navigation.
- **RobotModel**: Displays the robot model.
- **Path** on topic `/received_global_plan`: Displays the planned path to the
  goal.

After setting fixed frame to `map`, your RViz2 view should look similar to this:

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/robots/leo/advanced-guides/autonomous-navigation/nav2-rviz.webp"
  alt="Nav2 Stack RViz view"
  width="1577"
  height="987"
/>

Now, to send a navigation goal from RViz, select the 2D Goal Pose tool from the
toolbar (highlighted in the image below) located at the top, then click
somewhere on the map to set position or click and drag to set position and
orientation.

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/robots/leo/advanced-guides/autonomous-navigation/rviz-goal-tool.webp"
  alt="RViz2 2D Goal Pose tool"
  width="1577"
  height="987"
/>

Provided you clicked on a valid position, the robot should start moving towards
the goal. The path should now be visible in RViz2, and the robot should follow
it.

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/robots/leo/advanced-guides/autonomous-navigation/nav2-rviz-goal.webp"
  alt="Nav2 Stack RViz view with goal"
  width="1577"
  height="987"
/>

> Congratulations! You can now control your Leo Rover using the Nav2 Stack and

Reviewer: Maybe put this into 
:::success
block
:::

Author: Added

send navigation goals from RViz2.

### Configuration

Nav2 configuration can be found in the `config/navigation.yaml` file. You can
change the parameters to better suit your needs, but consult every change with
the official
[Nav2 configuration guide](https://docs.nav2.org/configuration/index.html)
first.

The `navigation.launch.xml` file contains different arguments that can be used
to customize the navigation system. Available launch arguments are:

- `localization`: Whether to use SLAM Toolbox in mapping mode or

>   [AMCL](#amcl-localization) for localization only (default: false).

Reviewer: What does false mean here

Author: False means no localization mode which means mapping mode. I'll add more clarity to description

Author: I changed the wording of the description to better explain what true and what false mean
